Figure 1: Meta-analysis by information content of human genome-scale bronchopulmonary dysplasia studies. A) Heatmap of top 25 genes ranked by MAIC score and indicating the source of the data. B) Gene set enrichment analysis of the human BPD gene set. Size of circle represents the number of genes in the pathway. The colour is reflective of adjusted p-value as indicated in the legend. The Gene Ratio reflects the proportion of input genes involved in each pathway. C) A core set of 23 proteins clustered using MCL (Markov clustering) resulting in 2 clusters: carbohydrate digestion and absorption (green) and phosphorylation of CD3 and t cell receptor zeta chains. The second cluster has features of MHC signalling (blue) and T cell activation (purple). D) Significantly over-represented Gene Ontology terms across all ontologies for prioritised human BPD genes. The colour is reflective of adjusted p-value as indicated in the legend. The Gene Ratio reflects the proportion of input genes involved in each pathway. E) A Protein-Protein interaction network (PPI) of 32 hub proteins clustered using MCL clustering. Relevant pathways are shown in the legend.

Figure 2: Comparison of analyses between ARDS and BPD: A) The top 10 significantly over-represented Gene Ontology terms across all ontologies for prioritised BPD (left) and ARDS (right) genes demonstrating overlap. The colour is reflective of adjusted p-value as indicated in the legend. The size of the circle reflects the Gene Ratio. B) Euler plot showing overlap of prioritised genes between BPD and ARDS MAIC analyses. C) Percent overlap between the top 50 ranked BPD genes versus the top 50 ARDS genes.  D) Significantly over-represented Gene Ontology terms across all ontologies for ARDS/BPD overlap genes. Size of circle represents the number of genes in the pathway. The colour is reflective of adjusted p-value as indicated in the legend. The Gene Ratio reflects the proportion of input genes involved in each pathway. E) A Protein-Protein interaction network (PPI) of 5 hub proteins that are shared between ARDS and BPD gene sets, clustered using MCL clustering. Features of IL8 signalling (blue) and lymphocyte surface receptors (yellow) are seen within the cluster.

Figure 3: Meta-analysis by information content of rodent genome-scale bronchopulmonary dysplasia studies. A) Heatmap of top 25 genes ranked by MAIC score and indicating the source of the data. B) Gene set enrichment analysis of the rodent BPD gene set. Size of circle represents the number of genes in the pathway. The colour is reflective of adjusted p-value as indicated in the legend. The Gene Ratio reflects the proportion of input genes involved in each pathway. C) Significantly over-represented Gene Ontology terms across all ontologies for prioritised rodent BPD genes. The colour is reflective of adjusted p-value as indicated in the legend. The Gene Ratio reflects the proportion of input genes involved in each pathway. D) A Protein-Protein interaction network (PPI) of 32 hub proteins clustered using MCL clustering. Relevant pathways are shown in the legend.

Figure 4: Comparison of MAIC analyses between human and rodent datasets: A) The top 10 significantly over-represented Gene Ontology terms across all ontologies for prioritised Human (left) and Rodent (right) BPD genes demonstrating overlap. The colour is reflective of adjusted p-value as indicated in the legend. The size of the circle reflects the Gene Ratio.  B) Euler plot showing overlap of prioritised genes between Human and Rodent BPD MAIC analyses. C) Percent overlap between the top 50 ranked Human BPD genes versus the top 50 Rodent BPD genes.  D) A Protein-Protein interaction network (PPI) of 24b proteins that are shared between Human and Rodent BPD gene sets, clustered using MCL clustering. This results in 4 clusters, coloured and named according to the legend.


 
Supplementary Figure 1: Prisma Systematic review inclusion diagram for Human BPD MAIC analysis.

Supplementary Figure 2: Prisma Systematic review inclusion diagram for Rodent BPD MAIC analysis.

Supplementary Figure 3: A) Heatmap of top 100 human BPD genes ranked by MAIC score and indicating the source of the data. B) Representation of shared information content among data sources in the MAIC analysis. Each experiment or data source is represented by a block on the outer ring of the circle; the size of data source blocks is proportional to the summed information content of the input list—that is, the total contribution that this data source makes to the aggregate, calculated as the sum of the MAIC gene scores contributed by that list. Lines are coloured according to the dominant data source. Data sources within the same category share the same colour. C) Enrichment plot of top pathways in Figure 1 B. D)  Gene prioritisation plot using the invariant knee method. The inflection point is indicated with a dotted line. 945 genes in the left upper quadrant of the knee threshold were prioritised for downstream analysis.

Supplementary Figure 4: Top 20 general cell types for the prioritised human BPD gene set, as indicated by WebCSEA.

Supplementary Figure 5:  A-E) Pathway analysis using String db of prioritised human BPD gene set. F) UpSet plot of overlapping proteins indicating hub proteins, identified by five methods: MNC - Maximum Neighbourhood Component, DMNC - Density of MNC, EPC - Edge Percolated Component, MCC - Maximal Clique Centrality.

Supplementary Figure 5: A) Heatmap of top 100 rodent BPD genes ranked by MAIC score and indicating the source of the data. B) Representation of shared information content among data sources in the MAIC analysis. Each experiment or data source is represented by a block on the outer ring of the circle; the size of data source blocks is proportional to the summed information content of the input list—that is, the total contribution that this data source makes to the aggregate, calculated as the sum of the MAIC gene scores contributed by that list. Lines are coloured according to the dominant data source. Data sources within the same category share the same colour. C) Enrichment plot of top pathways in Figure 3 B. D) Gene prioritisation plot using the invariant knee method. The inflection point is indicated with a dotted line. 1783 genes in the left upper quadrant of the knee threshold were prioritised for downstream analysis.

Supplementary Figure 7: Top 20 general cell types for the prioritised rodent BPD gene set, as indicated by WebCSEA.

Supplementary Figure 8:  A-E) Pathway analysis using String db of prioritised rodent BPD gene set. F) UpSet plot of overlapping proteins indicating hub proteins, identified by five methods: MNC - Maximum Neighbourhood Component, DMNC - Density of MNC, EPC - Edge Percolated Component, MCC - Maximal Clique Centrality.

