Figure 1: Meta-analysis by information content of human genome-scale bronchopulmonary dysplasia studies. A) Heatmap of top 100 ranked genes showing MAIC score B) Gene prioritisation using the Unit Invariant Knee method. Intersection of lines identifies elbow point of best-fit curve. Genes in the upper left quadrant (945) were prioritised. C) Significantly over-represented Gene Ontology terms across all ontologies for prioritised genes. D) Significantly enriched Reactome (p.adjust < 0.001) for prioritised genes. E) Rank order F) UpSet plot of overlapping proteins indicating hub proteins. G) MCL String cluster of 32 hub proteins.

Figure 2: Comparison of analyses between ARDS and BPD: A) Significantly over-represented Gene Ontology terms across all ontologies for prioritised BPD and ARDS genes demonstrating overlap. B) Euler plot showing overlap of prioritised genes between BPD and ARDS MAIC analyses. C) Percent overlap of lists. D) Significantly over-represented Gene Ontology terms across all ontologies for ARDS/BPD overlap genes. E) MCL String cluster of 5 hub proteins that are shared between ARDS and BPD.

Figure 3: Meta-analysis by information content of rodent genome-scale bronchopulmonary dysplasia studies. A) Heatmap of top 100 ranked genes showing MAIC score B) Gene prioritisation using the Unit Invariant Knee method. Intersection of lines identifies elbow point of best-fit curve. Genes in the upper left quadrant (1783) were prioritised. C) Significantly over-represented Gene Ontology terms (p.adjust < 3e-10) across all ontologies for prioritised genes. D) Significantly enriched Reactome (p.adjust < 5e-07) for prioritised genes. E) Rank order F) UpSet plot of overlapping proteins indicating hub proteins. G) MCL String cluster of 13 hub proteins.

Figure 4: Comparison of MAIC analyses between human and rodent datasets: A) Significantly over-represented Gene Ontology terms across all ontologies for prioritised human and rodent genes demonstrating overlap. B) Euler plot showing overlap of prioritised genes between BPD and ARDS MAIC analyses. C) Percent overlap of lists. D) Significantly over-represented Gene Ontology terms across all ontologies for human/rodent overlap genes. E) ….HUB

